README.md, before:

# Oakland-Gentrification-Ed-Analysis
MacKenzie Gaddy, Porter Jones, Craig Dittmann

## Summary
The focus of our project is on gentrification's impact on K-12 students in Oakland, California. We hope to take polygon data stating the gentrification risk for a given area from the Urban Displacement Project and analyze various educational markers for that space (e.g. looking at student records that indicate whether the student is on track or not). Student groups of the same areas can be matched based on demographic data. If data is available, we will ideally be able to do this analysis at a few different points in time to analyze the changes over time in neighborhood gentrification impact on school achievement as well.

## Background
TODO: Some introductory background information

## Questions we will explore
TODO: Problem statement, question(s) and/or objective(s)

## Datasets we will use
A few datasets we may use:
* [Urban Displacement Project](https://www.urbandisplacement.org/)
* [Oakland School Locations](https://data.oaklandca.gov/Education/Map-of-Oakland-Public-Schools/trbj-7f28)
* [Oakland School Educational Data](http://www.ousddata.org/)

## Tools/packages we will use
A few tools and packages we are considering using:
* [geopandas](https://geopandas.org/)
* [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
* [numpy](https://numpy.org/)
* [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/index.html)

## Planned methodology/approach
TODO: Planned methodology/approach

## Expected Outcomes
We do not have any strong expected outcomes at the moment.
Our objective is to approach this project with an exploratory mindset.
We will try to see if there are any interesting patterns or correlations,
but given how complicated educational environments are, we will likely not
be able to claim any causations in the scope of this project. 

We do suspect that gentrification interacts with schools and students in a variety of ways,
but we aren't sure if the data will show those interactions or necessarily what they are.

## Other Information
We are currently looking for related research on gentrification's impact on schools
and will update our outline as we find things.

## References
TODO: References

Commit message:

Add Background section to outline

README.md, after:

# Oakland-Gentrification-Ed-Analysis
MacKenzie Gaddy, Porter Jones, Craig Dittmann

## Summary
The focus of our project is on gentrification's impact on K-12 students in Oakland, California. We hope to take polygon data stating the gentrification risk for a given area from the Urban Displacement Project and analyze various educational markers for that space (e.g. looking at student records that indicate whether the student is on track or not). Student groups of the same areas can be matched based on demographic data. If data is available, we will ideally be able to do this analysis at a few different points in time to analyze the changes over time in neighborhood gentrification impact on school achievement as well.

## Background
Gentrification is defined by the Urban Displacement Project as:
> "A process of neighborhood change that includes economic change in a historically disinvested neighborhood —by means of real estate investment and new higher-income residents moving in - as well as demographic change - not only in terms of income level, but also in terms of changes in the education level or racial make-up of residents."


The Bay Area and Oakland specifically have experienced rapid gentrification in the past decade,
with 1/3 of poor neighborhoods experiencing some form of gentrification between 2013 and 2017, the highest rate in the country.

Gentrification is difficult to measure, as there are a lot of factors that could be used to classify a neighborhood as being "gentrified" some easier to track than others. The Urban Displacement Project has produced a system for classifying neighborhoods in varying stages of gentrification, which we will use for this project.

Since gentrification is a powerful transformation of a space, we wanted to explore any trends in schools/students related to that transformation. Oakland Unified School District has some public facing datasets which we will analyze in the context of our gentrification data.

## Questions we will explore
TODO: Problem statement, question(s) and/or objective(s)

## Datasets we will use
A few datasets we may use:
* [Urban Displacement Project](https://www.urbandisplacement.org/)
* [Oakland School Locations](https://data.oaklandca.gov/Education/Map-of-Oakland-Public-Schools/trbj-7f28)
* [Oakland School Educational Data](http://www.ousddata.org/)

## Tools/packages we will use
A few tools and packages we are considering using:
* [geopandas](https://geopandas.org/)
* [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
* [numpy](https://numpy.org/)
* [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/stable/index.html)

## Planned methodology/approach
TODO: Planned methodology/approach

## Expected Outcomes
We do not have any strong expected outcomes at the moment.
Our objective is to approach this project with an exploratory mindset.
We will try to see if there are any interesting patterns or correlations,
but given how complicated educational environments are, we will likely not
be able to claim any causations in the scope of this project. 

We do suspect that gentrification interacts with schools and students in a variety of ways,
but we aren't sure if the data will show those interactions or necessarily what they are.

## Other Information
We are currently looking for related research on gentrification's impact on schools
and will update our outline as we find things.

## References
* [Oakland, S.F. neighborhoods fastest gentrifying in U.S.](https://www.mercurynews.com/2020/06/18/oakland-s-f-neighborhoods-fastest-gentrifying-in-u-s/)
* [Gentrification and Displacement in the San Francisco Bay Area: A Comparison of Measurement Approaches](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6616964/)
* [Urban Displacement Project: Gentrification Explained](https://www.urbandisplacement.org/gentrification-explained)
